# Self-reference and Intelligence

I've always felt that people who aren't the smartest are ironically prone to see themselves as exceptionally
intelligent. It wasn't until I learned about the paradoxes related to self-reference I realised the connection.

Let's consider a 100m runner. Measuring is rather simple. Start the clock when the runner starts and stop the clock when
the runner crosses the finish line.  Of course, there are some practical challenges when you want to go to split second
accuracies. However, most importantly, there is broad agreement on what should be measured.

Conversely, when we want to measure the intelligence of a person, we are immediately posed with the challenge of
defining what comprises intelligence. Sure, we can define some subsets of cognitive capabilities such as speed in
solving a certain type of mathematical problems, or pattern recognition, or many more types of tests that are used in
standardized tests when determining the intelligence quota (IQ) of a person. However, as mentioned, these tests measure
a subset of cognitive capabilities rather than general intelligence.

Well, why don't we create tests that measure general intelligence instead? The problem is in defining what general
intelligence is. That is, somewhat surprisingly, an unsolvable problem. The root of the problem is that we are hitting a
paradox involving self-reference.

Think about it: defining what intelligence is requires intelligence. Because understanding intelligence requires
intelligence, we're stuck with a circular argument. It's a paradox! Everyone may think they understand (or that they
don't!) intelligence, but there is no way of knowing what is and what isn't intelligent.

So, maybe we just gather a lot of accomplished mathematicians, philosophers etc and have them decide what is and what
isn't intelligent? That is exactly how we've ended up with our current IQ tests. This approach is imperfect because
regardless of how successful the people in charge of designing the tests and measurements are, how do we know it was
intelligence that got them where they are now? Our way of choosing intelligent people may be wrong.

Okay, but all of this is just theory and in practice this is not an issue, right? Let's start small. I've always felt
that art critics have a funny job. Like, if you're good enough of an artist, you create art yourself. This leads to the
logical conclusion that art critics are less capable artists, so are their opinions worth anything? Art critics have
definitely failed countless times evaluating exceptional and disruptive art. Although, to be fair, for the most part I
think they're doing a fine job.

Surprisingly, difficulty of evaluation, especially considering ground-breaking discoveries, affects also mathematics. In
contrast to art, where what's good and less good art is opinionated, one would think that mathematics is a precise
discipline, a field of study free of ambiguities. Hence, when someone discovers something new and provides a rigorous
proof, you would think you just accept the results as they are. Because of paradoxes involving self-reference and
mind-bending discoveries about sets, things are not that simple.

One of the most famous victims of this is Georg Cantor. Cantor made some groud-breaking discoveries which for many
contemporary mathematicians were hard to accept. In hindsight, it is easy to understand the opposition. Cantor's
discoveries were not only unintuitive, but the consequences for the field of mathematics were massive. In fact, Cantor's
work was the last straw that threw the whole mathematics community into disarray as the fundamentals of mathematics
shattered.

What Cantor did is off-topic for this article. Instead, what we're interested in here is that Cantor had no shortage of
adversaries. Cantor's biggest opponent might have been Leopold Kronecker who called Cantor a "scientific charlatan" and
a "corrupter of youth". Another tidbit is that decades later Julius König was widely believed to have managed to
disprove Cantor's initial argument. König's proof was soon disproven as it was based on a false premise.

While Cantor's unfortunate predicament is an outlier in it's severity, the same issue appears everywhere where
intelligence is required. We simply cannot know who "gets it" and who's in the wrong. We are bound by a paradox of
self-reference we have no way of escaping.

Does this mean I'm a fatalist? Not so. While Cantor had fierce challengers, the mathematics community eventually
realized Cantor was right. (then again, we don't know of all those mathematicians who've been right, but no-one has been
able to understand them...)

The process how to figure out who's right and who's not is nowadays known as the scientific method. The basic ideas
behind the scientific method is surprisinly old. Already the ancient Greeks would practice sessions comparable to modern
day thesis defences. Interestingly, similar concepts were practiced by other ancient civilization as well, including the
Mayas in South America and China in Asia.

The basic premise that already ancient philosophers realized is that perfect knowledge can never be achieved. Instead,
we should create processes how to get as close to perfect knowledge as possible, even though we can never achieve it.
This is also the modern take on the scientific method. Science is self-correcting as any earlier discoveries and results
previously considered correct are subject to change.

This is also the message of this article. I want to make a point that we cannot know who is "intelligent", least of all
we ourselves. We don't know if we are correct, and we don't know if others are correct. Instead, we need humility and we
need a wide array of views. Most importantly, we must not have centralized authorities of truth and knowledge. This
means that we need independent thinkers and independent journals.
